3
Introduction
Many doctrines were important in Jonathan Edwards’ preaching and
writing ministry, and left a significant contribution to Christian thought. The doctrine
of justification was one of them. His Masters Thesis was on the subject.1 He also
chose to defend justification by grace through faith at the Yale commencement
address in 1723. According to Edwards, the beginnings of the revival in
Northampton in 1734-35 were sparked by sermons on justification.2 These sermons
are included in the volume of his preaching he had published, and the importance of
the theme of justification is highlighted by Edwards in its preface.3 Additionally, his
notes are replete with entries and essays dealing with the topic of justification by
faith.4 Schafer suggests that Edwards gave it little emphasis in the last 20 years,5yet
a number of essays and notes on justification were written in those years.6
One reason justification remained a key topic for Edwards was because of the
continued theological challenges to it from various quarters. Indeed, understanding
the context in which Edwards formulated and preached this doctrine will help to
clarify his distinctive emphases. The question of how Edwards advances our
understanding of justification demands us first to ask the question ‘Advances from
what’? Where had the understanding of justification progressed to? And what were
the influences on the theological thinking of Edwards’ day? Edwards was an inheritor
of the Reformation doctrine of justification.7 He is also regarded as the last of the
1 Edwards, J. ‘A Sinner is not Justified in the Sight of God except through the Righteousness of Christ Obtained by
Faith’. Pages 60-66 in Sermons and Discourses 1723-1729. WJE 14. Edited by Kenneth P. Minkema. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1997.
2 Edwards, J. Sermons and Discourses 1734-1738 (WJE 19; ed. M. X. Lesser; New Haven and London: Yale
University Press, 2001), 795.
3 Jonathan Edwards, ‘Preface to Discourses on Various Important Subjects’, in Sermons and Discourses 1734-1738,
793-798.
4 For example, no. 1354 focuses on the topic in Jonathan Edwards, ‘Miscellany 1354’, in The "Miscellanies" (Entry
Nos. 1153-1360) (WJE 23 ed. D. A. Sweeney; New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2004), 506-543.
5 Schafer, T. A. ‘Jonathan Edwards and Justification by Faith’. Church History 20 (1951) 55-67, 57. His conviction is
that certain elements of Edwards doctrine of justification ‘cause it to occupy an ambiguous and somewhat
precarious place in his theology.’ These are the prominent attention to the role of faith over the doctrines
connected with satisfaction and imputed righteousness, 58. But Gerstner is surely right that Edwards shifted his
strategic defence against Arminianism to the root in the libertarian, voluntaristic view of the will. Gerstner, J. H.
Jonathan Edwards – A Mini-Theology. Tyndale House, Illinois, 1987, 81.
6 The Controversy Notebooks were written 1740s to the 1750s. See especially Jonathan Edwards,
‘"Controversies" Notebook: Justification’, in Writings on the Trinity, Grace and Faith (WJE 21; ed. S. H. Lee; New
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2003), 328-413. Miscellanies 1153-1360 cover the period from 1751-
1758 from whence I have already mentioned entry 1354 on the topic (see footnote 4 above). 1250, 1260a, 1279-
80, 1346, also are on the nature of justification and faith.
7 For a good summary analysis of the Puritan developments see McGrath, Alister E. Iustitia Dei: A History of the
Christian Doctrine of Justification. Cambridge: University Press, 2005, 111-121.
4
Puritans and the first Evangelical. He had to defend the doctrine of justification
amidst the challenges of Enlightenment thinking. In addition, the three threats to the
purity of Reformed belief and practice in Edwards’ time and place were Catholicism,
Arminianism and Antinomianism. We will answer the essay question with these
influences in view. Cherry avers that each generation was called upon to interpret
the fundamental doctrine of justification by faith for his or her own time and place.8
It is the contention of this essay that Edwards did so upholding fully the Reformation
doctrine of justification as he engaged with his context and yet advanced the
understanding of the doctrine in several ways to deal with the contemporary
questions. He:
1. had a comprehensive understanding of justification in terms of what Christ’s work
achieved for the believer.
2. addressed the complex issues of how faith relates to justification, by developing
more precisely the Reformed understanding of union with Christ and explaining the
relationship by his notions of fitness and conditions.
3. used the same categories to argue for post-justification obedience as a fitting
response, and more sharply than any showed that a holy life was a natural outflow of
justification by faith. In this regard he also explained how any valid sense of reward
should be understood.
4. He made justification the centrepiece of evangelism.
5. His vision for a renovated world meant his preaching of justification was not just
promoting individual renewal but transformation of the world.
Edwards’ social and religious context
Edwards’ writing and preaching on justification addressed Arminianism and
Antinomianism in particular. Antinomianism was a 100 year old threat since Anne
Hutchinson was banished for her errors. Arminianism was a new movement lapping
8 Cherry, Conrad. The Theology of Jonathan Edwards: A Reappraisal. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990,
90.
5
at American shores’ in the early eighteenth century.9 Catholicism was an even older
Puritan enemy, though was not an immediate threat in the way the above two were.
‘Arminianism’ was the term for a growing theological trend, whose adherents
found attractive the idea that humans can contribute something towards salvation.
Goen clarifies the term saying ‘it had less to do with Jacobus Arminius (1560-1609),
the Dutch theologian from whom it took its name, than with a mood of rising
confidence in man's ability to gain some purchase of the divine favor by human
endeavor’.10 Minkema adds that Arminianism maintained the free will of humankind
to accept or reject the grace of God.’11 This religious view and its individualistic ideas
were evidence of the Enlightenment Zeitgeist influencing New England. In
marshalling his intellectual resources against Arminianism Edwards was not only
combating notions of justification by human works, but also notions which would
unravel the Puritan vision of a community of mutual relationships and
responsibilities.12
Edwards’ public debate against Arminianism began at his Yale days. His
Commencement address on justification was in the context of growing fears that
Arminianism would infiltrate the university following its Rector Timothy Cutler who
had the previous year been fired for his Arminian leanings.13 Closer to home, in the
period just before Edwards stepped into his Northampton pulpit to deliver his
revival sermons, Edwards writes of the ‘great noise in this part of the country,
Arminianism’.14 He is probably referring to the disturbance precipitated by two
nearby ministers with unorthodox views. Into this social and religious context we
also remember that Puritan Preparationism could be seen to give sanctification
priority over justification. Goen writes that an imperceptible shift in church life to
moral striving in New England resulted in many orthodox ministers unknowingly
9 Cherry, Theology, 92.
10 Goen, Clarence C. ‘Editor's Introduction’. Pages 1-95 in The Great Awakening. WJE 4. Edited by Clarence C. Goen.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1972, 10.
11 Minkema, Kenneth P. ‘Preface to the Period’. Pages 3-46 in Sermons and Discourses 1723-1729. Works of
Jonathan Edwards 14. Edited by Kenneth P. Minkema. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997, 17.
12 Covenants promoted mutual obligations not individual self- expression. For examples of New England Church
Covenants see ‘A coppy of ye covenant made at ye Gathering of ye first chh: in Reading, in New England, about ye
yr 1644’. Reading, Mass., Church Records, 1644-1769. Reading supplied for MA via Ridley Melbourne; and “Copy of
a Covenant, Entered into and Subscribed, by the People of God at Northampton . . . March 16, 1742” (WJE, vol. 39).
13 He had effectively declared his decision to join the Anglican Church For several reasons Anglicanism was
particularly abhorrent to many New England Puritan minds. For example to some it was synonymous with
Arminianism. Marsden, Jonathan Edwards, A Life, 87.
14 Edwards, Jonathan. ‘A Faithful Narrative’. Pages 97-211 in The Great Awakening. WJE 4. Edited by C. C. Goen.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1972, 148.
6
‘encouraging a subtle form of salvation by works.’15 Edwards’ own parish may have
been affected by these alternative formulations of the gospel. Justification was
certainly a controversial subject to be preaching. Some of his own congregation
members opposed the theme in the pulpit.16 At least in England Arminianism was
beginning to find some aspects of the interpretations of the doctrine of justification
by faith offensive, such as the notion of it being ‘apart from works’. There was an
increasing demand for God to be fair and give just recognition of effort.17
The other movement causing concern was Antinomianism. It emphasised that
assurance comes upon conversion and is not dependant on visible sanctification.
According to Winthrop one of Anne Hutchinson’s errors was that ‘no sanctification
can help us to evidence to us our justification.’18 Amidst the debates of the day
surrounding the connection of God’s saving work and its visible signs, Edward’s
grandfather had begun to relax the criteria for admission to the Lord’s Supper. In
effect, he had begun to sever the connection between justification and
sanctification.19 It may be that when Edwards arrived at Northhampton he entered a
situation where, ecclesiologically, a type of antinomianism was present.20
Antinomianism was feared for its apparent weakening any imperative for
persevering in godliness, and its potential undermining of order because it gave
priority to direct divine inspiration.21
In sum, these two movements were clearly in danger of opposite errors: salvation
through works on the one hand, and justification without works on the other. As
Edwards wrote and preached, he sought to address questions such as ‘How is a
person justified exactly?’; ‘Why must it be by faith alone?’; and ‘What role do human
15 Goen, ‘Editor’s Introduction,’ WJE 4:10.
16 Ola Winslow notes some of the more influential members of his congregation opposed strongly, particularly
Israel Williams. In Logan, Samuel T., Jr. ‘The Doctrine of Justification in the Theology of Jonathan Edwards’.
Westminster Theological Journal 46/1 (1984): 26-52, 26. See also Edwards, J. A Faithful Narrative, 148.
17 Jenson, Robert W. America's Theologian: A Recommendation of Jonathan Edwards. New York/Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1988, 55. See also Holifield, E. Brooks. Theology in America: Christian Thought from the Age of
the Puritans to the Civil War. New Haven/London, Yale Press, 2003, 114.
18 John Winthrop’s journal, ‘History of New England’, cited in Logan, “The Doctrine of Justification”, 28.
19 Logan suggests this was in a manner similar to Anne Hutchinson, Logan, Samuel T., Jr. ‘The Doctrine of
Justification in the Theology of Jonathan Edwards’. Westminster Theological Journal 46/1 (1984): 26-52, 29.
20 Logan, Ibid, 29.
21 See for example, The Examination of Mrs. Ann Hutchinson at the Court at Newtown, 1637, 5. Notes supplied for
MA class, Ridley Melbourne, 2010.
7
faith and obedience play in the process?’ His comprehensive case steers a course
between the two opposing debates, which allowed neither a place.22
The nature of justification
What Edwards does is to powerfully affirm the Reformation understanding of
justification by faith, yet, he clarifies the aspect of their teaching about imputation of
righteousness.
From Romans 4.5, Edwards argued that God justifies the ungodly apart from
any works of their own, but on the basis of faith alone. In the face of Arminianism it
was important for Edwards to stress that God regards the unjustified as ungodly, so
that it cannot be said that any goodness in a person is the ground for justification nor
can the Spirit’s work be accounted a cause of justification. The truths of divine
sovereignty and human inability remain constant anti-Arminian themes for Edwards’
ministry.23 The doctrine which Edwards finds in Rom 4.5 is summarised as:
“That we are justified only by faith in Christ and not by any manner of virtue
or goodness of our own.”24
Edwards teaches the Reformation truth, that Christ imputes the benefits of
justification to the believer. However, what Edwards does, is to place justification by
grace through faith within the larger frame of Christ’s whole life and not just his
death. Edwards argues that ‘from his incarnation to his resurrection, the purchase of
redemption was made’.25 Christ was obedient to his Father when he went to the
cross to die for our sins. Yet Christ was also obedient every day of his earthly life. He
positively fulfilled all the righteous demands of the law. As a result of Christ’s
righteousness his sacrifice satisfied the punishments required by the law for sin.
Christ’s righteousness is also imputed to the believer. So he or she is not only
forgiven, but receives God’s approval.26 Edwards calls these two functions of Christ’s
work in his death and life Christ’s passive righteousness, and Christ’s active
righteousness respectively. He says:
22 Or, in Logan’s words, ‘Edwards sought to walk the razor’s edge of biblical truth while avoiding the illusory
appeal of both Arminianism and Antinomianism.’ Logan, Ibid, 30.
23 Logan, Ibid, 310.
24 Edwards, J. ‘Justification by Faith Alone’. Pages 143-242 in Sermons and Discourses 1734-1738. WJE 19. Edited
by Max X. Lesser. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2001, 149.
25 Jonathan Edwards, A History of the Work of Redemption (WJE 9; New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989), 295.
26 For a good summary of what is significant about Edwards view of the atonement see Conrad Cherry, The
Theology of Jonathan Edwards, 93.
8
… there can be no doubt that justification is a certain act of positive favor that
not only frees a person from sin but is also understood in fact as the approval
of him as righteous through the righteousness of Christ, both active and
passive in both obedience and satisfaction.27
Edwards insisted on the necessity of both for the atonement, and stressed Christ’s
active obedience for justification against those who denied it. Arminianism taught
that God took care of sin, and so removed the obstacles to a good life, so that we now
must get on with it. 28 But Edwards summarises:
… Some suppose that nothing more is intended in Scripture by justification
than barely the remission of sins; if it be so it is very strange….
Then Edwards reiterates his two-fold view of the atonement…
A person is said to be justified when he is approved of God as free from the
guilt of sin, and its deserved punishment, and as having that righteousness
belonging to him that entitles to the reward of life
that a believer’s justification implies not only remission of sins, or acquittance
from the wrath due to it, but also an admittance to a title to that glory that is
the reward of righteousness, is more directly taught in the Scripture, as
particular in Rom 5;1-2, where the Apostle mentions both of these, as joint
benefits implied in justification… 29
An Arminian view tells half the story and gives God half the glory. Edwards says:
to suppose that all that Christ does is only to make atonement for us by
suffering, is…to rob him of half his glory…for if so, all that he does is to deliver
us from hell; he does not purchase heaven for us.30
So Edwards teaches a very fulsome and positive view of what Christ achieved for the
believer. Works are necessary for justification, but not our own but Christ’s. It is not
possible that imperfect obedience can be sufficient to a holy God. God doesn’t lower
27 Jonathan Edwards, ‘A Sinner is not Justified in the Sight of God except through the Righteousness of Christ
Obtained by Faith’, in Sermons and Discourses 1723-1729 (WJE 14; ed. K. P. Minkema; New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1997), 60.
28 Jenson, R. America’s Theologian, 60.
29 Jonathan Edwards, ‘Justification by Faith Alone’, 150, 151.
30 Jonathan Edwards, ‘Justification by Faith Alone’, 240.
9
or change the standards, as Arminians were want to argue, so that God can accept
our faith as a work. No, infinite guilt on our part, requires infinite righteousness, and
for that God has provided Jesus for us. The mindset of being self-made persons is still
a challenge today, even more so than in Edwards’ day, so a doctrine of total
dependence on God for our past, present, and future salvation will still be
uncongenial.31 Edwards’ emphasis is a lesson for us.
By faith alone
Edwards also advances our understanding of how justification relates to faith. Whilst
the forensic understanding of salvation maintains the gift character of it, we must
adequately portray the act of the human recipient.32 Logan says that in Edwards’
suggestion for understanding the particle ‘by’ “lies a major portion of Edwards’
contribution to the discussion.”33 Edwards says the word ‘by’ faith does connote
conditionality of justification, however he distinguishes between causal and non-
causal conditionality. Christ’s atoning work is the sole causal condition of
justification for the believer. But faith is a non-causal condition for justification.
Edwards:
in one sense Christ alone performs the condition of our justification and
salvation; and in another sense, faith is the condition of our
justification…there is a difference between being justified by a thing, and that
thing universally, necessarily, and inseparably attending justification;…34
For Edwards a cause is an antecedant on which the event depends. It is the reason or
ground for something being. God’s grace is the only legitimate cause for justification.
Faith is unique among non-causal conditions and is of a different order to the
conditionality of anything else.35 Faith does what nothing else can do. Significantly,
to explain this Edwards develops the notions of union with Christ and fitness. Firstly,
Edwards finds that the traditional way of understanding faith as an instrument
31 Jenson, America’s Theologian 55
32 Cherry, M. Theology, 91-92.
33 Logan, S.T. ‘The Doctrine of Justification in the Theology of Jonathan Edwards’, 32. See also Cherry who says
that it is here, at the point of the linkage between faith and its reality, that Edwards interprets the substance of
the doctrine of justification and delineates the meaning of salvation. Cherry, Theology, 90.
34 Edwards, Justification by Faith, 152.
35 Cherry, Theology, 100-101.
10
inadequately represents the role of faith in justification. It is an ‘obscure way of
speaking’.36
If faith be an instrument, it is more properly the instrument by which we
receive Christ, than the instrument by which we receive justification.37
The unique role of faith is that by faith we are united to Christ, which union forms the
foundation upon which God’s justifying verdict is based.38 Edwards notes the
importance of such biblical imagery as marriage, and the tree and the branches as
evidence of this vital union. All the benefits which come to the believer are grounded
on this union. Thus by faith we receive Christ and being united to Christ we are
pronounced justified by God.
Edwards further explains the relation of faith to justification, and faith and
union with Christ, in terms of natural ‘fitness’ or ‘suitability’. He sees these
relationships as ontologically grounded.39 God sees it fit in his divine ordering of the
world, that they belong together. Faith is naturally fitted to justification yet that does
not have to mean cause and effect. It is a reflection of God’s love for order. In
Edwards’ words:
God will neither look on Christ’s merits as ours, nor adjudge his benefits to us,
till we be in Christ: nor will he look upon us as being in him, without an active
unition of our hearts and souls to him; because he is a wise being, and delights
in order, and not in confusion, and that things should be together or asunder
according to their nature; and his making such a constitution is a testimony of
his love of order …40
It is also an expression of God’s nature to treat persons as intelligent active relational
beings. So it is right that for a union there be:
a mutual act of both, that each should receive the other, as actively joining
themselves one to another…’. Christ the Mediator has already purchased
justification so it is ‘meet that believer should have this purchased benefit
assigned to him’. ‘Faith includes the whole act of unition to Christ as a Saviour.
36 Edwards, Justification by Faith, 152-154.
37 Edwards, Justification by Faith, 153.
38 Logan, ‘The Doctrine of Justification in the Theology of Jonathan Edwards’, 34.
39 Logan, Ibid, 37.
40 Edwards, ‘Justification by Faith Alone’,161.
